README.md, before:

# InstrMCP: Instrumentation Control MCP Server

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-2.0.0-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/releases)
[![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![MCP](https://img.shields.io/badge/MCP-Model%20Context%20Protocol-green.svg)](https://github.com/anthropics/mcp)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/instrmcp/badge/?version=latest)](https://instrmcp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)
[![Tests](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/actions/workflows/tests.yml)
[![Lint](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/actions/workflows/lint.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/actions/workflows/lint.yml)

MCP server suite for quantum device physics laboratory's instrumentation control, enabling Large Language Models to interact directly with physics instruments and measurement systems through QCodes and JupyterLab.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1d4d6e42-138c-4f49-90ef-803eb6c01488

## Features

- **Full QCodes Integration**: Built-in support for all QCodes instrument drivers
- **Database Integration**: Read-only access to QCodes databases with intelligent code generation
- **MeasureIt Templates**: Comprehensive measurement pattern library and code generation
- **JupyterLab Native**: Seamless integration with JupyterLab
- **Dynamic Tool Creation**: Create custom MCP tools at runtime using LLM-powered tool registration
- **Safe mode**: Read-only mode with optional unsafe execution
- **CLI**: Easy server management with `instrmcp` command
- **MCP**: Standard Model Context Protocol for LLM integration
- The MCP has been tested to work with Claude Desktop, Claude Code, and Codex CLI
## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Install from source
git clone https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP.git
cd instrMCP
pip install -e .

# Set required environment variable
# For macOS/Linux:
export instrMCP_PATH="$(pwd)"
echo 'export instrMCP_PATH="'$(pwd)'"' >> ~/.zshrc  # or ~/.bashrc
source ~/.zshrc

# For Windows (PowerShell):
$env:instrMCP_PATH = (Get-Location).Path
[System.Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable('instrMCP_PATH', (Get-Location).Path, 'User') 
```

**That's it!** QCodes, JupyterLab, and all dependencies are automatically installed.

### Extension: MeasureIt

To install MeasureIt, visit https://github.com/nanophys/MeasureIt and follow the installation instructions.

### Usage

#### Loading InstrMCP in Jupyter

```bash
# Start JupyterLab
jupyter lab
```

In a Jupyter notebook cell:

```python
# Load InstrMCP extension
%load_ext instrmcp.extensions

# Start MCP server
%mcp_start

# Check status
%mcp_status

# Enable unsafe mode (code execution)
%mcp_unsafe

# Enable optional features (restart required)
%mcp_option add measureit database
%mcp_restart
```

#### CLI Server Management

```bash
# Start standalone servers
instrmcp jupyter --port 3000                # Jupyter MCP server
instrmcp jupyter --port 3000 --unsafe       # With unsafe mode
instrmcp qcodes --port 3001                 # QCodes station server

# Configuration and info
instrmcp config    # Show configuration paths
instrmcp version   # Show version
instrmcp --help    # Show all commands
```

## Documentation

- **[Architecture](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)** - Technical architecture, package structure, MCP tools and resources
- **[Troubleshooting](docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md)** - Common issues and solutions
- **[Development Guide](docs/DEVELOPMENT.md)** - Development setup, testing, code quality, contributing

## Configuration Example

Station configuration uses standard YAML format:

```yaml
# instrmcp/config/data/default_station.yaml
instruments:
  mock_dac:
    driver: qcodes.instrument_drivers.mock.MockDAC
    name: mock_dac_1
    enable: true
```

Configuration is automatic! The system auto-detects installation paths. For custom setups:

```bash
# View current configuration
instrmcp config

# Custom config file (optional)
mkdir -p ~/.instrmcp
echo "custom_setting: value" > ~/.instrmcp/config.yaml
```

## Claude Desktop Integration

InstrMCP provides seamless integration with Claude Desktop for AI-assisted laboratory instrumentation control.

### Quick Setup (2 Steps)

1. **Run Automated Setup**:
```bash
cd /path/to/your/instrMCP
./claudedesktopsetting/setup_claude.sh
```

2. **Restart Claude Desktop** completely and test with: *"What MCP tools are available?"*

**Manual Setup Alternative:**
```bash
# 1. Copy and edit configuration
cp claudedesktopsetting/claude_desktop_config.json ~/Library/Application\ Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json

# 2. Edit the copied file - replace placeholders with actual paths:
#    /path/to/your/python3 → $(which python3)
#    /path/to/your/instrMCP → $(pwd)
```

See [`claudedesktopsetting/README.md`](claudedesktopsetting/README.md) for detailed setup instructions and troubleshooting.

## Claude Code Integration

Claude Code supports local MCP servers via STDIO. Use the provided launcher to connect:

```bash
# Add instrMCP as MCP Server
claude mcp add instrMCP --env instrMCP_PATH=$instrMCP_PATH \
  --env PYTHONPATH=$instrMCP_PATH \
  -- $instrMCP_PATH/venv/bin/python \
  $instrMCP_PATH/claudedesktopsetting/claude_launcher.py

# Verify connection
/mcp
```

**Prerequisites:**
- Ensure `instrMCP_PATH` environment variable is set
- Have a Jupyter server running with the instrMCP extension loaded
- MCP server started in Jupyter with `%mcp_start`

## Codex CLI Integration

Codex expects MCP servers over STDIO. Use the Codex launcher to proxy STDIO calls to your HTTP MCP server.

**Configuration:**
- command: `python`
- args: `["/path/to/your/instrMCP/codexsetting/codex_launcher.py"]`
- env:
  - `JUPYTER_MCP_HOST=127.0.0.1`
  - `JUPYTER_MCP_PORT=8123`

## V2.0.0 Features (Current Release)

### 1. Resource Discovery Tool
The `mcp_list_resources()` tool helps LLMs discover and effectively use MCP resources:

**Features:**
- **Comprehensive Resource Listing**: All available MCP resources with URIs, descriptions, and use cases
- **Context-Aware**: Only shows resources based on enabled options (core, MeasureIt, database)
- **Resources vs Tools Guidance**: Educates LLMs on when to use read-only resources vs active tools
- **Common Patterns**: Examples like "Check available_instruments → Use qcodes_instrument_info"
- **First-Use Recommendation**: Use this tool FIRST to discover what context is available

**Example Response:**
```json
{
  "total_resources": 8,
  "resources": [
    {
      "uri": "resource://available_instruments",
      "name": "Available Instruments",
      "use_when": "Need to know what instruments exist BEFORE calling qcodes_instrument_info",
      "example": "Check this first to see instrument names..."
    }
  ],
  "guidance": {
    "resources_vs_tools": {
      "resources": "Provide READ-ONLY reference data, templates, and documentation",
      "tools": "Perform ACTIVE operations like reading live values, executing code"
    },
    "when_to_use_resources": [
      "Before using tools - check available_instruments first",
      "For code templates - get MeasureIt examples",
      "For configuration - check database_config"
    ]
  }
}
```

### 2. Visual Diff Consent for Notebook Patching
Enhanced `notebook_apply_patch` with visual diff dialog showing exactly what will change:

**Features:**
- **Visual Diff Display**: Red deletions, green additions, context lines
- **Pattern Warning**: Prominent alert if old_text not found in cell
- **Change Statistics**: Shows chars removed/added and delta
- **Consent Workflow**: "Decline" | "Allow" | "Always Allow" buttons
- **Battle-Tested Diffing**: Uses industry-standard `diff` library (v8.0.2) from GitHub/GitLab

**Example:** When LLM calls `notebook_apply_patch(old_text="x = 10", new_text="x = 20")`, user sees:
```diff
- x = 10  ← Red background with strikethrough
+ x = 20  ← Green background
```

### 3. Line Range Parameters for Context Management
Control LLM context window consumption with line range selection:

**Features:**
- **line_start** / **line_end** parameters (default: lines 1-100)
- **Automatic Bounds Clamping**: Invalid ranges safely handled
- **Truncation Metadata**: Returns `total_lines`, `truncated` flag
- **Context Window Savings**: Prevents large cells from consuming excessive tokens

**Example:**
```python
# Get only first 50 lines of a large cell
get_editing_cell(line_start=1, line_end=50)

# Get lines 100-200 for focused analysis
get_editing_cell(line_start=100, line_end=200)
```

### 4. Dynamic Tool Creation
Create custom MCP tools at runtime using LLM-powered tool registration:

```python
# In Jupyter with instrMCP loaded in unsafe mode
# LLM can create tools dynamically using meta-tools:
dynamic_register_tool(
    name="analyze_data",
    source_code="def analyze_data(x): return x * 2",
    capabilities=["cap:numpy", "cap:custom.analysis"],  # Freeform labels
    parameters=[{"name": "x", "type": "number", "description": "Input", "required": true}]
)
```

**Features:**
- **6 Meta-Tools**: `register`, `update`, `revoke`, `list`, `inspect`, `registry_stats`
- **Consent UI**: User approval required for tool registration/updates (shows full source code)
- **Freeform Capability Labels**: Tag tools with descriptive capabilities for discovery
- **Persistent Registry**: Tools saved to `~/.instrmcp/registry/` and reloaded on server start
- **Audit Trail**: All tool operations logged to `~/.instrmcp/audit/tool_audit.log`
- **Auto JSON Correction**: Optional LLM-powered JSON error fixing (opt-in via `%mcp_option auto_correct_json`)

**Capability Labels** (v2.0.0):
Capabilities are freeform documentation labels - NOT enforced security boundaries. Use any descriptive string:
- Suggested format: `cap:library.action` (e.g., `cap:numpy.array`, `cap:qcodes.read`)
- Used for discovery, filtering, and transparency in consent UI
- No validation - flexibility for LLMs to describe tool dependencies
- Future: Enforcement layer planned for v3.0.0

See [Dynamic Tools Quickstart](docs/DYNAMIC_TOOLS_QUICKSTART.md) for details.

### Testing & Quality
- **464 tests** (463 passed, 1 skipped)
- **Zero linter errors** across all modules
- **Code formatted** with black
- **CI/CD passing** on all workflows

## V3.0.0 Roadmap

- **Capability Enforcement**: Security boundaries based on capability taxonomy
- Support RedPitaya
- Support Raspberry Pi for outdated instruments
- Integrating lab wiki knowledge base for safety rails
- More LLM integration examples

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! See our [Development Guide](docs/DEVELOPMENT.md) for details on:
- Setting up development environment
- Running tests
- Code quality standards
- Contribution guidelines

## Links

- [Documentation](https://instrmcp.readthedocs.io)
- [Issues](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/issues)
- [QCodes](https://qcodes.github.io/Qcodes/)
- [Model Context Protocol](https://github.com/anthropics/mcp)

Commit message:

Update author info and improve JupyterLab extension setup
Changed author email and homepage URLs to reflect new contact information across Python and package files. Enhanced JupyterLab extension setup to handle symlink failures on Windows by falling back to copying files, improving cross-platform reliability. Added LICENSE and MANIFEST.in, updated README with MeasureIt installation instructions, and introduced a custom setup.py for dynamic JupyterLab extension installation.

README.md, after:

# InstrMCP: Instrumentation Control MCP Server

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-2.0.0-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/releases)
[![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![MCP](https://img.shields.io/badge/MCP-Model%20Context%20Protocol-green.svg)](https://github.com/anthropics/mcp)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/instrmcp/badge/?version=latest)](https://instrmcp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)
[![Tests](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/actions/workflows/tests.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/actions/workflows/tests.yml)
[![Lint](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/actions/workflows/lint.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/actions/workflows/lint.yml)

MCP server suite for quantum device physics laboratory's instrumentation control, enabling Large Language Models to interact directly with physics instruments and measurement systems through QCodes and JupyterLab.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1d4d6e42-138c-4f49-90ef-803eb6c01488

## Features

- **Full QCodes Integration**: Built-in support for all QCodes instrument drivers
- **Database Integration**: Read-only access to QCodes databases with intelligent code generation
- **MeasureIt Templates**: Comprehensive measurement pattern library and code generation
- **JupyterLab Native**: Seamless integration with JupyterLab
- **Dynamic Tool Creation**: Create custom MCP tools at runtime using LLM-powered tool registration
- **Safe mode**: Read-only mode with optional unsafe execution
- **CLI**: Easy server management with `instrmcp` command
- **MCP**: Standard Model Context Protocol for LLM integration
- The MCP has been tested to work with Claude Desktop, Claude Code, and Codex CLI
## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Install from source
git clone https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP.git
cd instrMCP
pip install -e .

# Set required environment variable
# For macOS/Linux:
export instrMCP_PATH="$(pwd)"
echo 'export instrMCP_PATH="'$(pwd)'"' >> ~/.zshrc  # or ~/.bashrc
source ~/.zshrc

# For Windows (PowerShell):
$env:instrMCP_PATH = (Get-Location).Path
[System.Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable('instrMCP_PATH', (Get-Location).Path, 'User') 
```

**That's it!** QCodes, JupyterLab, and all dependencies are automatically installed.

### Extension: MeasureIt

MeasureIt provides comprehensive measurement pattern templates for common physics experiments.

**Installation:**
```bash
pip install qmeasure
```

**Important Notes:**
- Import as `measureit` (not `qmeasure`): `import measureit`
- Python 3.8+ required
- For source installation or advanced configuration, see the [MeasureIt GitHub repository](https://github.com/nanophys/MeasureIt)

**Enable in InstrMCP:**
```python
# In Jupyter notebook
%mcp_option add measureit
%mcp_restart
```

### Usage

#### Loading InstrMCP in Jupyter

```bash
# Start JupyterLab
jupyter lab
```

In a Jupyter notebook cell:

```python
# Load InstrMCP extension
%load_ext instrmcp.extensions

# Start MCP server
%mcp_start

# Check status
%mcp_status

# Enable unsafe mode (code execution)
%mcp_unsafe

# Enable optional features (restart required)
%mcp_option add measureit database
%mcp_restart
```

#### CLI Server Management

```bash
# Start standalone servers
instrmcp jupyter --port 3000                # Jupyter MCP server
instrmcp jupyter --port 3000 --unsafe       # With unsafe mode
instrmcp qcodes --port 3001                 # QCodes station server

# Configuration and info
instrmcp config    # Show configuration paths
instrmcp version   # Show version
instrmcp --help    # Show all commands
```

## Documentation

- **[Architecture](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)** - Technical architecture, package structure, MCP tools and resources
- **[Troubleshooting](docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md)** - Common issues and solutions
- **[Development Guide](docs/DEVELOPMENT.md)** - Development setup, testing, code quality, contributing

## Configuration Example

Station configuration uses standard YAML format:

```yaml
# instrmcp/config/data/default_station.yaml
instruments:
  mock_dac:
    driver: qcodes.instrument_drivers.mock.MockDAC
    name: mock_dac_1
    enable: true
```

Configuration is automatic! The system auto-detects installation paths. For custom setups:

```bash
# View current configuration
instrmcp config

# Custom config file (optional)
mkdir -p ~/.instrmcp
echo "custom_setting: value" > ~/.instrmcp/config.yaml
```

## Claude Desktop Integration

InstrMCP provides seamless integration with Claude Desktop for AI-assisted laboratory instrumentation control.

### Quick Setup (2 Steps)

1. **Run Automated Setup**:
```bash
cd /path/to/your/instrMCP
./claudedesktopsetting/setup_claude.sh
```

2. **Restart Claude Desktop** completely and test with: *"What MCP tools are available?"*

**Manual Setup Alternative:**
```bash
# 1. Copy and edit configuration
cp claudedesktopsetting/claude_desktop_config.json ~/Library/Application\ Support/Claude/claude_desktop_config.json

# 2. Edit the copied file - replace placeholders with actual paths:
#    /path/to/your/python3 → $(which python3)
#    /path/to/your/instrMCP → $(pwd)
```

See [`claudedesktopsetting/README.md`](claudedesktopsetting/README.md) for detailed setup instructions and troubleshooting.

## Claude Code Integration

Claude Code supports local MCP servers via STDIO. Use the provided launcher to connect:

```bash
# Add instrMCP as MCP Server
claude mcp add instrMCP --env instrMCP_PATH=$instrMCP_PATH \
  --env PYTHONPATH=$instrMCP_PATH \
  -- $instrMCP_PATH/venv/bin/python \
  $instrMCP_PATH/claudedesktopsetting/claude_launcher.py

# Verify connection
/mcp
```

**Prerequisites:**
- Ensure `instrMCP_PATH` environment variable is set
- Have a Jupyter server running with the instrMCP extension loaded
- MCP server started in Jupyter with `%mcp_start`

## Codex CLI Integration

Codex expects MCP servers over STDIO. Use the Codex launcher to proxy STDIO calls to your HTTP MCP server.

**Configuration:**
- command: `python`
- args: `["/path/to/your/instrMCP/codexsetting/codex_launcher.py"]`
- env:
  - `JUPYTER_MCP_HOST=127.0.0.1`
  - `JUPYTER_MCP_PORT=8123`

## V2.0.0 Features (Current Release)

### 1. Resource Discovery Tool
The `mcp_list_resources()` tool helps LLMs discover and effectively use MCP resources:

**Features:**
- **Comprehensive Resource Listing**: All available MCP resources with URIs, descriptions, and use cases
- **Context-Aware**: Only shows resources based on enabled options (core, MeasureIt, database)
- **Resources vs Tools Guidance**: Educates LLMs on when to use read-only resources vs active tools
- **Common Patterns**: Examples like "Check available_instruments → Use qcodes_instrument_info"
- **First-Use Recommendation**: Use this tool FIRST to discover what context is available

**Example Response:**
```json
{
  "total_resources": 8,
  "resources": [
    {
      "uri": "resource://available_instruments",
      "name": "Available Instruments",
      "use_when": "Need to know what instruments exist BEFORE calling qcodes_instrument_info",
      "example": "Check this first to see instrument names..."
    }
  ],
  "guidance": {
    "resources_vs_tools": {
      "resources": "Provide READ-ONLY reference data, templates, and documentation",
      "tools": "Perform ACTIVE operations like reading live values, executing code"
    },
    "when_to_use_resources": [
      "Before using tools - check available_instruments first",
      "For code templates - get MeasureIt examples",
      "For configuration - check database_config"
    ]
  }
}
```

### 2. Visual Diff Consent for Notebook Patching
Enhanced `notebook_apply_patch` with visual diff dialog showing exactly what will change:

**Features:**
- **Visual Diff Display**: Red deletions, green additions, context lines
- **Pattern Warning**: Prominent alert if old_text not found in cell
- **Change Statistics**: Shows chars removed/added and delta
- **Consent Workflow**: "Decline" | "Allow" | "Always Allow" buttons
- **Battle-Tested Diffing**: Uses industry-standard `diff` library (v8.0.2) from GitHub/GitLab

**Example:** When LLM calls `notebook_apply_patch(old_text="x = 10", new_text="x = 20")`, user sees:
```diff
- x = 10  ← Red background with strikethrough
+ x = 20  ← Green background
```

### 3. Line Range Parameters for Context Management
Control LLM context window consumption with line range selection:

**Features:**
- **line_start** / **line_end** parameters (default: lines 1-100)
- **Automatic Bounds Clamping**: Invalid ranges safely handled
- **Truncation Metadata**: Returns `total_lines`, `truncated` flag
- **Context Window Savings**: Prevents large cells from consuming excessive tokens

**Example:**
```python
# Get only first 50 lines of a large cell
get_editing_cell(line_start=1, line_end=50)

# Get lines 100-200 for focused analysis
get_editing_cell(line_start=100, line_end=200)
```

### 4. Dynamic Tool Creation
Create custom MCP tools at runtime using LLM-powered tool registration:

```python
# In Jupyter with instrMCP loaded in unsafe mode
# LLM can create tools dynamically using meta-tools:
dynamic_register_tool(
    name="analyze_data",
    source_code="def analyze_data(x): return x * 2",
    capabilities=["cap:numpy", "cap:custom.analysis"],  # Freeform labels
    parameters=[{"name": "x", "type": "number", "description": "Input", "required": true}]
)
```

**Features:**
- **6 Meta-Tools**: `register`, `update`, `revoke`, `list`, `inspect`, `registry_stats`
- **Consent UI**: User approval required for tool registration/updates (shows full source code)
- **Freeform Capability Labels**: Tag tools with descriptive capabilities for discovery
- **Persistent Registry**: Tools saved to `~/.instrmcp/registry/` and reloaded on server start
- **Audit Trail**: All tool operations logged to `~/.instrmcp/audit/tool_audit.log`
- **Auto JSON Correction**: Optional LLM-powered JSON error fixing (opt-in via `%mcp_option auto_correct_json`)

**Capability Labels** (v2.0.0):
Capabilities are freeform documentation labels - NOT enforced security boundaries. Use any descriptive string:
- Suggested format: `cap:library.action` (e.g., `cap:numpy.array`, `cap:qcodes.read`)
- Used for discovery, filtering, and transparency in consent UI
- No validation - flexibility for LLMs to describe tool dependencies
- Future: Enforcement layer planned for v3.0.0

See [Dynamic Tools Quickstart](docs/DYNAMIC_TOOLS_QUICKSTART.md) for details.

### Testing & Quality
- **464 tests** (463 passed, 1 skipped)
- **Zero linter errors** across all modules
- **Code formatted** with black
- **CI/CD passing** on all workflows

## V3.0.0 Roadmap

- **Capability Enforcement**: Security boundaries based on capability taxonomy
- Support RedPitaya
- Support Raspberry Pi for outdated instruments
- Integrating lab wiki knowledge base for safety rails
- More LLM integration examples

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! See our [Development Guide](docs/DEVELOPMENT.md) for details on:
- Setting up development environment
- Running tests
- Code quality standards
- Contribution guidelines

## Links

- [Documentation](https://instrmcp.readthedocs.io)
- [Issues](https://github.com/caidish/instrMCP/issues)
- [QCodes](https://qcodes.github.io/Qcodes/)
- [Model Context Protocol](https://github.com/anthropics/mcp)
