docs/source/database_integration.rst, before:

Database Integration
====================

InstrMCP provides read-only access to QCodes databases, enabling LLMs to query measurement history and generate code based on past experiments.

Overview
--------

The database integration is an optional feature that provides:

- Read-only access to QCodes SQLite databases
- Metadata extraction from past measurements
- Measurement pattern recognition
- Code generation from historical data

Enable with:

.. code-block:: python

   %mcp_option database
   %mcp_restart

Database Tools
--------------

list_experiments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

List all experiments in the database.

**Parameters**:

- ``database_path`` (str, optional): Path to database. Uses default if not provided.
- ``scan_nested`` (bool, optional): If true, also search nested ``Databases`` subdirectories
  when resolving the default database path.

**Returns**: Array of experiments with:

- Experiment ID
- Name
- Sample name
- Start/end timestamps
- Number of datasets

**Example via Claude**:

"Show me all experiments in the database"

get_dataset_info
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Get detailed information about a specific dataset.

**Parameters**:

- ``id`` (int): Dataset ID
- ``database_path`` (str, optional): Path to database

**Returns**: Dataset metadata including:

- Run ID and name
- Experiment association
- Start/end times
- Parameter information (dependent/independent)
- Measurement metadata
- Parent/child datasets
- GUIDs and run description

**Example via Claude**:

"Tell me about dataset 42"

get_database_stats
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Get aggregate statistics about the database.

**Parameters**:

- ``database_path`` (str, optional): Path to database

**Returns**: Database statistics:

- Total number of datasets
- Total number of experiments
- Date range (first/last measurement)
- Database size
- Health indicators

**Example via Claude**:

"Give me statistics about my measurement database"

Database Resources
------------------

Database resources are not exposed. Use the database tools instead, e.g.
``database_list_experiments`` and ``database_get_dataset_info``.

Database Path Resolution
-------------------------

Understanding how database paths are resolved is crucial for avoiding common issues.

Resolution Priority
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When no explicit path is provided, databases are resolved in this order:

1. **Explicit path parameter**: If ``database_path`` is provided in the tool call
2. **MeasureIt default**: ``$MeasureItHome/Databases/Example_database.db`` (if available)
3. **QCodes config**: From ``qcodes.config.core.db_location``

When ``INSTRMCP_DATA_DIR`` environment variable is set, fallback to MeasureIt and QCodes
paths is DISABLED to ensure isolation in sandboxed environments.

Path Format Examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Correct path formats:**

.. code-block:: python

   # Absolute path (always works)
   database_list_experiments(database_path="/home/user/data/measurements.db")
   
   # Relative filename (creates in data directory root)
   database_list_experiments(database_path="measurements.db")
   
   # Relative path with subdirectories
   database_list_experiments(database_path="experiment1/Databases/data.db")
   
   # Use default database (no path specified)
   database_list_experiments()

**Avoid these patterns** that can create ``Databases/Databases/`` nesting:

.. code-block:: python

   # ✗ DON'T: This creates Databases/Databases/ when used with init_database()
   database_path="Databases/measurements.db"
   
   # ✓ DO: Use just the filename or full relative path instead
   database_path="measurements.db"  # Creates in data_dir root
   # or
   database_path="experiment1/Databases/measurements.db"  # Full relative path

Nested Database Search (scan_nested)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``scan_nested`` parameter allows searching for databases in nested directory structures:

.. code-block:: python

   # Search for databases in experiment subdirectories
   database_list_experiments(scan_nested=True)

This searches for databases matching the pattern ``*/Databases/*.db`` under the data directory:

- ✓ Finds: ``data_dir/experiment1/Databases/data.db``
- ✓ Finds: ``data_dir/experiment2/Databases/measurements.db``
- ✗ Excludes: ``data_dir/Databases/root.db`` (not nested)
- ✗ Excludes: ``data_dir/Databases/Databases/nested.db`` (problematic nesting)
- ✗ Excludes: ``data_dir/exp/sub/Databases/deep.db`` (too deep)

**Use scan_nested when:**

- Working with multiple experiments in separate subdirectories
- Each experiment has its own ``Databases/`` folder
- You want to discover all available databases

**Don't use scan_nested when:**

- Databases are in the root data directory
- You know the exact database path
- Performance is critical (scanning is slower)

Default Database Location
--------------------------

The database path is determined by:

1. **Explicit path**: If provided in tool call
2. **MeasureIt integration**: ``$MeasureItHome/Databases/Example_database.db``
3. **QCodes config**: From ``qcodes.config.core.db_location``

Check current database:

.. code-block:: python

   import qcodes as qc
   print(qc.config.core.db_location)

Database Structure
------------------

QCodes uses SQLite databases with the following structure:

Key Tables
~~~~~~~~~~

- **experiments**: Experiment metadata
- **runs**: Individual measurement runs (datasets)
- **layouts**: Parameter definitions
- **dependencies**: Parameter relationships

The database schema follows QCodes conventions. See QCodes documentation for details.

Example Queries
---------------

Via Claude Interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Find recent IV curves**:

.. code-block:: text

   User: "Show me all IV curve measurements from the last week"

   Claude: [Calls list_experiments()]
   Claude: [Filters by name pattern and date]
   Claude: "Found 3 IV curve datasets: #142, #156, #189"

**Analyze measurement parameters**:

.. code-block:: text

   User: "What parameters were measured in dataset 150?"

   Claude: [Calls get_dataset_info(id=150)]
   Claude: "Dataset 150 measured:
           - Independent: gate_voltage (100 points)
           - Dependent: current, conductance
           - Duration: 5.2 minutes"

**Compare experiments**:

.. code-block:: text

   User: "Compare the parameters used in experiments 'sample_A' and 'sample_B'"

   Claude: [Calls list_experiments()]
   Claude: [Gets details for relevant datasets]
   Claude: "Both experiments measured IV curves, but sample_B added temperature"

Code Generation
---------------

The database integration enables intelligent code generation:

Pattern Recognition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Claude can analyze past measurements and suggest similar code:

.. code-block:: text

   User: "Generate code to measure an IV curve like I did last week"

   Claude: [Calls database_list_experiments]
   Claude: [Finds IV curve pattern]
   Claude: "Based on dataset #156, here's the code:
           ```python
           from qcodes import Measurement

           meas = Measurement()
           meas.register_parameter(gate.voltage)
           meas.register_parameter(dmm.current)

           with meas.run() as datasaver:
               for v in np.linspace(-1, 1, 100):
                   gate.voltage(v)
                   current = dmm.current()
                   datasaver.add_result(
                       (gate.voltage, v),
                       (dmm.current, current)
                   )
           ```"

Template Extraction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Common patterns become reusable templates:

- Parameter sweep structures
- Data saver configurations
- Measurement loops
- Post-processing steps

Safety and Limitations
----------------------

Read-Only Access
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Database integration is strictly read-only:

- No dataset modification
- No experiment deletion
- No parameter changes
- Query-only operations

This ensures measurement data integrity.

Performance Considerations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Database queries are cached briefly
- Large databases may have slower queries
- Use filters to limit result size
- Statistics are computed on-demand

Privacy
~~~~~~~

The LLM can see:

- All experiment metadata
- Parameter names and values
- Measurement timestamps
- Dataset relationships

Consider this when using cloud-based LLMs with proprietary data.

Configuration
-------------

Database Path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Set default database in QCodes config:

.. code-block:: python

   import qcodes as qc
   qc.config.core.db_location = "/path/to/database.db"

Or provide path explicitly in tool calls:

.. code-block:: python

   list_experiments(database_path="/custom/path/experiments.db")

MeasureIt Integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When MeasureIt is available, the default database is:

.. code-block:: python

   $MeasureItHome/Databases/Example_database.db

This is set automatically if MeasureIt is installed.

Resource Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Configure resource behavior in ``db_resources.py``:

- Number of recent measurements
- Pattern recognition threshold
- Template generation rules

Troubleshooting
---------------

"Database not found"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If database path is incorrect:

1. Check ``qcodes.config.core.db_location``
2. Verify file exists: ``ls /path/to/database.db``
3. Use explicit path in tool calls
4. Check file permissions

"Databases/Databases/ nested directories created"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This happens when using relative paths incorrectly with ``init_database()``:

**Problem**: Using ``database_path="Databases/measurements.db"`` creates nested structure

.. code-block:: bash

   # This creates the wrong structure:
   data_dir/
     Databases/
       Databases/           # ✗ Nested (confusing)
         measurements.db

**Solution 1**: Use just the filename

.. code-block:: python

   # Creates database in data_dir root
   init_database("measurements.db")
   # Result: data_dir/measurements.db

**Solution 2**: Use full relative path

.. code-block:: python

   # Creates proper nested structure
   init_database("experiment1/Databases/measurements.db")
   # Result: data_dir/experiment1/Databases/measurements.db

**Solution 3**: Use absolute path

.. code-block:: python

   # Explicit control over location
   init_database("/full/path/to/measurements.db")

**Prevention**: The ``database_list_experiments`` tool with ``scan_nested=True`` now
automatically excludes ``Databases/Databases/`` patterns to avoid confusion.

"No datasets returned"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If queries return empty:

1. Verify database has data: ``get_database_stats()``
2. Check experiment name filters
3. Verify date range
4. Inspect database directly:

.. code-block:: bash

   sqlite3 /path/to/database.db
   SELECT COUNT(*) FROM runs;

"Database is locked"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If database is in use:

1. Close other QCodes sessions
2. Wait for running measurements to complete
3. Use read-only connection (automatic in InstrMCP)

Performance Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For slow queries on large databases:

1. Add more specific filters (experiment ID, date range)
2. Limit number of results
3. Use ``get_dataset_info`` for specific datasets
4. Consider database cleanup/archiving

Advanced Usage
--------------

Custom Database Queries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For advanced queries, you can extend the database tools in:

``instrmcp/extensions/database/query_tools.py``

Example custom query:

.. code-block:: python

   def find_measurements_by_parameter(
       param_name: str,
       database_path: Optional[str] = None
   ) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
       """Find all measurements that include a specific parameter."""
       db_path = get_default_db_path(database_path)

       with connect(db_path) as conn:
           cursor = conn.cursor()
           cursor.execute('''
               SELECT r.run_id, r.name, r.run_timestamp
               FROM runs r
               JOIN layouts l ON r.run_id = l.run_id
               WHERE l.parameter = ?
           ''', (param_name,))

           results = cursor.fetchall()
           return [
               {
                   "run_id": row[0],
                   "name": row[1],
                   "timestamp": row[2]
               }
               for row in results
           ]

Then register as MCP tool in ``registrars/database_tools.py``.

Database Migrations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

QCodes databases evolve over time. InstrMCP uses QCodes' built-in schema handling:

.. code-block:: python

   from qcodes.dataset.sqlite.database import connect

   # Connection automatically handles schema version
   with connect(db_path) as conn:
       # Query using current schema
       pass

No manual migration needed.

Best Practices
--------------

1. **Use filters**: Limit query scope with experiment names, date ranges
2. **Cache results**: Avoid repeated identical queries
3. **Read-only mindset**: Never attempt to modify database
4. **Privacy awareness**: Consider data sensitivity when using cloud LLMs
5. **Verify paths**: Always check database location is correct
6. **Monitor size**: Large databases may need archiving
7. **Test queries**: Verify queries return expected data before automation

Commit message:

Add Jupyter CWD DB discovery and progress pings
Detect *.db files in the notebook working directory and include them when resolving/listing databases; prefer MeasureIt default over CWD and use CWD before QCodes config. Add periodic async progress_callback support to MeasureIt wait loops and wire a Context-based progress reporter from the MeasureIt tools to keep client connections alive during long waits. Update docs and metadata to reflect the new resolution order, add unit tests for CWD database discovery and deduplication, and bump fastmcp to >=2.14.3 to pick up an HTTP transport timeout fix.

docs/source/database_integration.rst, after:

Database Integration
====================

InstrMCP provides read-only access to QCodes databases, enabling LLMs to query measurement history and generate code based on past experiments.

Overview
--------

The database integration is an optional feature that provides:

- Read-only access to QCodes SQLite databases
- Metadata extraction from past measurements
- Measurement pattern recognition
- Code generation from historical data

Enable with:

.. code-block:: python

   %mcp_option database
   %mcp_restart

Database Tools
--------------

list_experiments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

List all experiments in the database.

**Parameters**:

- ``database_path`` (str, optional): Path to database. Uses default if not provided.
- ``scan_nested`` (bool, optional): If true, also search nested ``Databases`` subdirectories
  when resolving the default database path.

**Returns**: Array of experiments with:

- Experiment ID
- Name
- Sample name
- Start/end timestamps
- Number of datasets

**Example via Claude**:

"Show me all experiments in the database"

get_dataset_info
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Get detailed information about a specific dataset.

**Parameters**:

- ``id`` (int): Dataset ID
- ``database_path`` (str, optional): Path to database

**Returns**: Dataset metadata including:

- Run ID and name
- Experiment association
- Start/end times
- Parameter information (dependent/independent)
- Measurement metadata
- Parent/child datasets
- GUIDs and run description

**Example via Claude**:

"Tell me about dataset 42"

get_database_stats
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Get aggregate statistics about the database.

**Parameters**:

- ``database_path`` (str, optional): Path to database

**Returns**: Database statistics:

- Total number of datasets
- Total number of experiments
- Date range (first/last measurement)
- Database size
- Health indicators

**Example via Claude**:

"Give me statistics about my measurement database"

Database Resources
------------------

Database resources are not exposed. Use the database tools instead, e.g.
``database_list_experiments`` and ``database_get_dataset_info``.

Database Path Resolution
-------------------------

Understanding how database paths are resolved is crucial for avoiding common issues.

Resolution Priority
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When no explicit path is provided, databases are resolved in this order:

1. **Explicit path parameter**: If ``database_path`` is provided in the tool call
2. **MeasureIt default**: ``$MeasureItHome/Databases/Example_database.db`` (if available)
3. **Jupyter working directory**: Any ``*.db`` files in the notebook's working directory (``os.getcwd()``)
4. **QCodes config**: From ``qcodes.config.core.db_location``

When ``INSTRMCP_DATA_DIR`` environment variable is set, fallback to MeasureIt and QCodes
paths is DISABLED to ensure isolation in sandboxed environments.

Path Format Examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Correct path formats:**

.. code-block:: python

   # Absolute path (always works)
   database_list_experiments(database_path="/home/user/data/measurements.db")
   
   # Relative filename (creates in data directory root)
   database_list_experiments(database_path="measurements.db")
   
   # Relative path with subdirectories
   database_list_experiments(database_path="experiment1/Databases/data.db")
   
   # Use default database (no path specified)
   database_list_experiments()

**Avoid these patterns** that can create ``Databases/Databases/`` nesting:

.. code-block:: python

   # ✗ DON'T: This creates Databases/Databases/ when used with init_database()
   database_path="Databases/measurements.db"
   
   # ✓ DO: Use just the filename or full relative path instead
   database_path="measurements.db"  # Creates in data_dir root
   # or
   database_path="experiment1/Databases/measurements.db"  # Full relative path

Nested Database Search (scan_nested)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``scan_nested`` parameter allows searching for databases in nested directory structures:

.. code-block:: python

   # Search for databases in experiment subdirectories
   database_list_experiments(scan_nested=True)

This searches for databases matching the pattern ``*/Databases/*.db`` under the data directory:

- ✓ Finds: ``data_dir/experiment1/Databases/data.db``
- ✓ Finds: ``data_dir/experiment2/Databases/measurements.db``
- ✗ Excludes: ``data_dir/Databases/root.db`` (not nested)
- ✗ Excludes: ``data_dir/Databases/Databases/nested.db`` (problematic nesting)
- ✗ Excludes: ``data_dir/exp/sub/Databases/deep.db`` (too deep)

**Use scan_nested when:**

- Working with multiple experiments in separate subdirectories
- Each experiment has its own ``Databases/`` folder
- You want to discover all available databases

**Don't use scan_nested when:**

- Databases are in the root data directory
- You know the exact database path
- Performance is critical (scanning is slower)

Default Database Location
--------------------------

The database path is determined by:

1. **Explicit path**: If provided in tool call
2. **MeasureIt integration**: ``$MeasureItHome/Databases/Example_database.db``
3. **Jupyter working directory**: ``*.db`` files in the notebook working directory
4. **QCodes config**: From ``qcodes.config.core.db_location``

Check current database:

.. code-block:: python

   import qcodes as qc
   print(qc.config.core.db_location)

Database Structure
------------------

QCodes uses SQLite databases with the following structure:

Key Tables
~~~~~~~~~~

- **experiments**: Experiment metadata
- **runs**: Individual measurement runs (datasets)
- **layouts**: Parameter definitions
- **dependencies**: Parameter relationships

The database schema follows QCodes conventions. See QCodes documentation for details.

Example Queries
---------------

Via Claude Interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Find recent IV curves**:

.. code-block:: text

   User: "Show me all IV curve measurements from the last week"

   Claude: [Calls list_experiments()]
   Claude: [Filters by name pattern and date]
   Claude: "Found 3 IV curve datasets: #142, #156, #189"

**Analyze measurement parameters**:

.. code-block:: text

   User: "What parameters were measured in dataset 150?"

   Claude: [Calls get_dataset_info(id=150)]
   Claude: "Dataset 150 measured:
           - Independent: gate_voltage (100 points)
           - Dependent: current, conductance
           - Duration: 5.2 minutes"

**Compare experiments**:

.. code-block:: text

   User: "Compare the parameters used in experiments 'sample_A' and 'sample_B'"

   Claude: [Calls list_experiments()]
   Claude: [Gets details for relevant datasets]
   Claude: "Both experiments measured IV curves, but sample_B added temperature"

Code Generation
---------------

The database integration enables intelligent code generation:

Pattern Recognition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Claude can analyze past measurements and suggest similar code:

.. code-block:: text

   User: "Generate code to measure an IV curve like I did last week"

   Claude: [Calls database_list_experiments]
   Claude: [Finds IV curve pattern]
   Claude: "Based on dataset #156, here's the code:
           ```python
           from qcodes import Measurement

           meas = Measurement()
           meas.register_parameter(gate.voltage)
           meas.register_parameter(dmm.current)

           with meas.run() as datasaver:
               for v in np.linspace(-1, 1, 100):
                   gate.voltage(v)
                   current = dmm.current()
                   datasaver.add_result(
                       (gate.voltage, v),
                       (dmm.current, current)
                   )
           ```"

Template Extraction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Common patterns become reusable templates:

- Parameter sweep structures
- Data saver configurations
- Measurement loops
- Post-processing steps

Safety and Limitations
----------------------

Read-Only Access
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Database integration is strictly read-only:

- No dataset modification
- No experiment deletion
- No parameter changes
- Query-only operations

This ensures measurement data integrity.

Performance Considerations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Database queries are cached briefly
- Large databases may have slower queries
- Use filters to limit result size
- Statistics are computed on-demand

Privacy
~~~~~~~

The LLM can see:

- All experiment metadata
- Parameter names and values
- Measurement timestamps
- Dataset relationships

Consider this when using cloud-based LLMs with proprietary data.

Configuration
-------------

Database Path
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Set default database in QCodes config:

.. code-block:: python

   import qcodes as qc
   qc.config.core.db_location = "/path/to/database.db"

Or provide path explicitly in tool calls:

.. code-block:: python

   list_experiments(database_path="/custom/path/experiments.db")

MeasureIt Integration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When MeasureIt is available, the default database is:

.. code-block:: python

   $MeasureItHome/Databases/Example_database.db

This is set automatically if MeasureIt is installed.

Resource Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Configure resource behavior in ``db_resources.py``:

- Number of recent measurements
- Pattern recognition threshold
- Template generation rules

Troubleshooting
---------------

"Database not found"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If database path is incorrect:

1. Check ``qcodes.config.core.db_location``
2. Verify file exists: ``ls /path/to/database.db``
3. Use explicit path in tool calls
4. Check file permissions

"Databases/Databases/ nested directories created"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This happens when using relative paths incorrectly with ``init_database()``:

**Problem**: Using ``database_path="Databases/measurements.db"`` creates nested structure

.. code-block:: bash

   # This creates the wrong structure:
   data_dir/
     Databases/
       Databases/           # ✗ Nested (confusing)
         measurements.db

**Solution 1**: Use just the filename

.. code-block:: python

   # Creates database in data_dir root
   init_database("measurements.db")
   # Result: data_dir/measurements.db

**Solution 2**: Use full relative path

.. code-block:: python

   # Creates proper nested structure
   init_database("experiment1/Databases/measurements.db")
   # Result: data_dir/experiment1/Databases/measurements.db

**Solution 3**: Use absolute path

.. code-block:: python

   # Explicit control over location
   init_database("/full/path/to/measurements.db")

**Prevention**: The ``database_list_experiments`` tool with ``scan_nested=True`` now
automatically excludes ``Databases/Databases/`` patterns to avoid confusion.

"No datasets returned"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If queries return empty:

1. Verify database has data: ``get_database_stats()``
2. Check experiment name filters
3. Verify date range
4. Inspect database directly:

.. code-block:: bash

   sqlite3 /path/to/database.db
   SELECT COUNT(*) FROM runs;

"Database is locked"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If database is in use:

1. Close other QCodes sessions
2. Wait for running measurements to complete
3. Use read-only connection (automatic in InstrMCP)

Performance Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For slow queries on large databases:

1. Add more specific filters (experiment ID, date range)
2. Limit number of results
3. Use ``get_dataset_info`` for specific datasets
4. Consider database cleanup/archiving

Advanced Usage
--------------

Custom Database Queries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For advanced queries, you can extend the database tools in:

``instrmcp/extensions/database/query_tools.py``

Example custom query:

.. code-block:: python

   def find_measurements_by_parameter(
       param_name: str,
       database_path: Optional[str] = None
   ) -> List[Dict[str, Any]]:
       """Find all measurements that include a specific parameter."""
       db_path = get_default_db_path(database_path)

       with connect(db_path) as conn:
           cursor = conn.cursor()
           cursor.execute('''
               SELECT r.run_id, r.name, r.run_timestamp
               FROM runs r
               JOIN layouts l ON r.run_id = l.run_id
               WHERE l.parameter = ?
           ''', (param_name,))

           results = cursor.fetchall()
           return [
               {
                   "run_id": row[0],
                   "name": row[1],
                   "timestamp": row[2]
               }
               for row in results
           ]

Then register as MCP tool in ``registrars/database_tools.py``.

Database Migrations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

QCodes databases evolve over time. InstrMCP uses QCodes' built-in schema handling:

.. code-block:: python

   from qcodes.dataset.sqlite.database import connect

   # Connection automatically handles schema version
   with connect(db_path) as conn:
       # Query using current schema
       pass

No manual migration needed.

Best Practices
--------------

1. **Use filters**: Limit query scope with experiment names, date ranges
2. **Cache results**: Avoid repeated identical queries
3. **Read-only mindset**: Never attempt to modify database
4. **Privacy awareness**: Consider data sensitivity when using cloud LLMs
5. **Verify paths**: Always check database location is correct
6. **Monitor size**: Large databases may need archiving
7. **Test queries**: Verify queries return expected data before automation
